# Chapter 5: Ottergram using Media Queries

## Outline

* Announcements
* Looking ahead: Chapter 6 is spread out over several weeks
* Chapter 4 Flexbox review
* Chapter 5 on Media Queries

## Getting Started

We'll do the following almost every class, so practice:

* Start VS Code
* login to `youracct@cs.wellesley.edu`
* start a terminal
* navigate to your `cs204` folder

## Chapter 4 review

We'll start by exploring the solution from
[Chapter 4](../../front-end-dev-resources/book-solutions/Chapter-05before/ottergram/)

You can copy this to explore it with me. Note that their version of the
solution to Chapter 4 jumps ahead and also provides the solution to
Chapter 5, so I've renamed the solution `Chapter-05before`.  Assuming you
did the "getting started" steps above, do:

```
cp -r ~cs204/pub/downloads/Chapter-05before ch5
ls -R ch5
```

Then, open the working page in Chrome: [ch5](https://cs.wellesley.edu/~cs204guest/) (modify the URL to look at your own account then drill down to find the page)

We'll look at the effect of the flexbox styles and the `position:absolute`
properties

What questions do you have?

## Recap of Reading

We'll visit the [reading](../../reading/ch05.html) and quickly recap
that. It's pretty short.

## Quiz Questions

[Your questions](../../quizzes/quiz04.html)

## Using the Media Queries

Here's our goal for 
[Chapter 5](../../front-end-dev-resources/book-solutions/Chapter-04/ottergram/)
Resize the browser window to see the magic.

## Step 0: Viewing on Devices

Use the Chrome Developer to see what the site looks like on different
kinds of devices:

* Open the inspector in your `ch5` tab
* At the upper left of the Developer tools menu, click `Toggle device toolbar`
* Open the menu of devices and look at Ottergram on, say, an iPhone 6/7/8
* toggle the orientation

Here is my [ch5 step 0](ch5a/ottergram/), which is the same as our
"before" site, above.

## Step 1: Resetting the Viewport

Resetting the viewport means to make the layout viewport (the one that the
browser uses to lay out the elements of the page) match the size of the
visual viewport (the actual screen size).

Copy the following to the HEAD of the `index.html` file in your `ch5`
ottergram, between the `meta` and the `title`.

```
:::HTML
<meta name="viewport" content="width=device-width, initial-scale=1">
```

Remember, you can open the file in VSC in several ways. I'll do:

```
code ch5/ottergram/index.html
```

Save, switch to Chrome and shift+reload. View the result with the device
toolbar.

Here is my [ch5 step 1](ch5b/ottergram/)

You won't see a lot of difference, but look at the thumbnails at the
bottom. They are a lot bigger in the `ch5b` version (after step1) 
compared to the `ch5a` version (before step 1).

Open the inspector and look at the *width* of the BODY tag (for an iPhone
6/7/8):

* `ch5a` version, it's 980 pixels 
* `ch5b` version, it's 375 pixels 

The thumbnails widths are:

* `ch5a` version, they are 120 pixels 
* `ch5b` version, they are 120 pixels also

So, in the `ch5b` version the thumbnails are roughly a third of the width
of the phone, while in the `ch5a` version, they are roughly one eighth. No wonder they are so small!


## Step 2 Adding first Media Query

Now, open the CSS file and add this media query at the end:

```
:::CSS
@media all and (min-width: 768px) {
    .main-content {
        flex-direction: row;
        overflow: hidden;
    }
}
```

This says that if the screen is wide (wider than 768px), arrange the
children of the `.main-content` element in a row. The `.main-content`
element is the flexbox that contains the list of thumbnails and the big
detail picture.

Here is my [ch5 step 2](ch5c/ottergram/)

This is a mess!  But resize the browser to make it narrow (narrower than
768px). Much better!

Next, we'll fix the formatting for the wide version.

## Step 3 More Wide Layout Rules

Go back to the end of your CSS file and add the following *inside* the
media query

```
:::CSS
    .thumbnail-list {
        flex-direction: column;
        order: 0;
        margin-left: 20px;
    }

    .thumbnail-item {
        max-width: 260px;
    }

    .thumbnail-item + .thumbnail-item {
        margin-top: 20px;
    }
```

These rules should be a bit more comprehensible now:

* make the thumbnails a column, and make them the first child
* limit the width of each item
* put a margin-top on all items except the first

Here is my [ch5 step 3](ch5d/ottergram/) This looks pretty good!

## Conclusion/Summary

* design for small devices first, arranging things vertically
* at the bottom of your CSS, test for a wider device
* if so, change the layout to take advantage of that space

## Bronze Challenge: Landscape layouts

Many times, the narrow dimension is the width (portrait mode), so making
an image or other element `width:100%` makes it as large as possible and
preserves the *aspect ratio*.  We may have to scroll vertically to see
additional content, but people are used to that.

However, in this chapter, they have constrained the height of the page to
the size of the device, and so vertical scrolling won't happen.

If the device is in *portrait* mode, limiting the width of an element,
such as the detail image to 90% works well:

```.detail-image { width: 90% }```

However, if the device is in *landscape* mode, a width of 90% will make
the image too big vertically, overlapping other content.  We'll see this
in class.

If you want something to fit its container vertically, using something
like `height:90%`, there has to be a chain of height settings all the way
to the top of the element tree.

See this [stackoverflow post](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/1622027/percentage-height-html-5-css)

That's the secret to the bronze challenge. Try it!

Here's [my solution](../../front-end-dev-resources/book-solutions/Chapter-04/ottergram/orientation.html)

## Next time

We'll start JavaScript. We *won't* read Chapter 6 for next time, as I
think it tries to pack too much into one chapter. By all means read ahead
if you'd like, but we won't be returning to the book for several class
meetings. We'll just have online readings for the next few meetings before
we attack chapter 6.  We will break chapter 6 into four steps:

1. JavaScript
1. JavaScript Objects and methods
1. JavaScript, jQuery and the DOM,
1. JavaScript and event handlers

They don't use jQuery until later, but I like introducing it earlier.

## End of Class

At the end of each class, I'll hand out paper slips. On it, please write
*your name* and one of the following:

* A question you have about the material of the day
* Something you learned
* A suggestion
* An "I'm okay" statement

