# Handling Events with JavaScript

This is an action-packed chapter, where they introduce JavaScript, the
DOM, events and event handlers all in one.  We've spread that out over the
last few class meetings, but now it's time to delve into what the chapter
covered.

The main goal of the chapter is to add an event handler to the thumbnail
otter pictures so that clicking on a thumbnail will cause that picture to
be displayed in the larger version (called the *detail* image). This is a
very cool and useful effect, often used in web pages with image galleries
like this one.

## Recap

I won't try to recap everything in this dense chapter, but I'll try to
remind you of the main points

* we can add arbitrary information to a DOM element by adding
attributes. To make sure that the attribute doesn't conflict with one
that has meaning to the browser, we need to ensure that the first five
characters of the attribute name is `data-`.  For example, if I want to
add information to an element about how classy it is, I could add a
`data-class=fancy` attribute.
* we can look up a DOM element using `document.querySelector()` where the
argument is a string that contains a selector expression in the CSS
language, such as `#fred` or `.gryffindor` or even
`[data-image-role="target"]` which looks up an element that has that
attribute/value pair.
* the JS objects returned by `querySelector` have properties that we can
modify, thereby updating the page. For example, `obj.src="otter1.jpg"`
changes the `src` of an element (presumably an IMG), which would cause
the browser to load and display a different picture.
* there is a `setAttribute()` method that achieves the same effect
* we should specify `"use strict"` as a string at the top of our JS
functions to ask the browser to be a bit less permissive about possible
errors. For example, if a variable hasn't been declared (maybe because
you mispelled it) the browser will complain instead of just creating a
new global.
* we can attach a function as an *event handler* for an event using
the `.addEventListener()` method. The function will be invoked by the browser
whenever the event occurs
* the function that we attach can either be *named* or *anonymous*, meaning a
function expression or function literal, like `function () { ... }`
* the argument function is passed in without parens after it, because parens would 
invoke the function and only pass in the return value. Instead, we want to pass
in the function itself
* the callback function is invoked with a JS object that contains a bunch of
information about the event. This is called the *event object*
* the event object has a method called `preventDefault()` which, if invoked, will cause
the browser *not* to do the "normal" thing, whatever that normal thing is. In
Ottergram, we're clicking on a hyperlink, and the normal thing is to visit the URL
specified in the `href`. We want to *not* do that, so the event handler executes
`event.preventDefault` where `event` is just the parameter that gets assigned the event
object.
* If we want to select more than one element (e.g. all the thumbnails), we can use
`document.querySelectorAll()`  Note that that returns a *NodeList* which is like an
JavaScript array but doesn't support all the array methods. Best to iterate over it with a `for`
loop. Alternatively, convert it to a JS array using `[].slice.call.(*nodelist*)`

## Raw JS versus jQuery

Your book decided to defer the introduction of jQuery. This is a fine
decision; they're already throwing a lot at you in this chapter. Because
we're spreading the content out over several meetings, I decided to
introduce jQuery. So, let's talk about the correspondence between raw JS
and JQ.

<div>
    <style scoped>
        .bordered td { padding: 1em 0.3ex }
        .bordered { border: 2px solid deepskyblue; }
        .raw { border-top: 2px solid deepskyblue; margin-top: 1ex }
    </style>

<table class="bordered">
<tbody>
<tr class="raw"><td>Raw JS</td><td><code>document.querySelector(sel_string)</code></td></tr>
<tr class="jq"><td>jQuery</td><td><code>$(sel_string)</code></td></tr>
<tr class="why"><td>use</td><td>get a DOM element</td></tr>

<tr class="raw"><td>Raw JS</td><td><code>document.querySelectorAll(sel_string)</code></td></tr>
<tr class="jq"><td>jQuery</td><td><code>$(sel_string)</code></td></tr>
<tr class="why"><td>use</td><td>get a list of DOM elements (jQuery always returns sets)</td></tr>

<tr class="raw"><td>Raw JS</td><td><code><em>elt</em>.getAttribute(attrib_string)</code></td></tr>
<tr class="jq"><td>jQuery</td><td><code><em>jq_set</em>.attr(attrib_string)</code></td></tr>
<tr class="why"><td>use</td><td>get the value of an attribute</td></tr>

<tr class="raw"><td>Raw JS</td><td><code><em>elt</em>.setAttribute(attrib_string,value_string)</code></td></tr>
<tr class="jq"><td>jQuery</td><td><code><em>jq_set</em>.attr(attrib_string,value_string)</code></td></tr>
<tr class="why"><td>use</td><td>set an attribute to a value</td></tr>

<tr class="raw"><td>Raw JS</td><td><code><em>elt</em>.textContent = string</code></td></tr>
<tr class="jq"><td>jQuery</td><td><code><em>jq_set</em>.text(string)</code></td></tr>
<tr class="why"><td>use</td><td>set the text inside the element</td></tr>

<tr class="raw"><td>Raw JS</td><td><code><em>elt</em>.addEventListener(event_type,callback_function)</code></td></tr>
<tr class="jq"><td>jQuery</td><td><code><em>jq_set</em>.on(event_type, callback_function)</code></td></tr>
<tr class="why"><td>use</td><td>attach an event handler to an element</td></tr>

<tr class="raw"><td>Raw JS</td><td><code><em>elt</em>.addEventListener('click',callback_function)</code></td></tr>
<tr class="jq"><td>jQuery</td><td><code><em>jq_set</em>.click(callback_function)</code></td></tr>
<tr class="why"><td>use</td><td>attach a handler for click events to an element</td></tr>
</tbody>
</table>
</div>

You see that the jQuery methods are similar to raw JS, just as intuitive,
more consistent (they are always methods, while raw JS is a mixture of
methods and attributes), and more concise. 

Note that we didn't learn jQuery's `.on()` method; instead, we learned a
special case for click handlers, namely `click()`. I added `on` above for
completeness.

## Thumbnails

Note that in Ottergram, the same image file is used for both the thumbnail
(small) and the detail (big) version.  If there were many thumbnails, such
that you expect most of them won't get clicked on, that would be a poor
design, because your page would have downloaded many big images only to
scale most of them down.  Thus, your download would be increased for no
benefit: a waste of time and bandwidth.

In Ottergram, there are only a few pictures, so the waste is
negligible. In a different application, we might create special thumbnail
versions. Note that their code doesn't assume that the URL of the detail
image is the same as the URL of the thumbnail, so their code is ready for
that improvement. That's good design.
