# Visual Effects with CSS

This is an <q>eye candy</q> chapter. Eye candy is fun and nice to have,
but in most cases is not essential.  On the other hand, managing the
limited space on the screen by having thing appear and disappear is
important for the useability of a site.

This is a brief summary of the chapter. Read the chapter first for all the
important concepts and techniques.

## Using Descendant Selectors

The first important point is that we can change the layout of the page by
adding and removing classes to the elements that need to change. However,
the disadvantage of this technique is that if we make N changes via
JavaScript, the page needs to have its layout recomputed N times. It's
better to make *one* change that all our layout rules react to.

We can do that by adding a class to a top-level element of our page (such
as the `body`), and using *descendant selectors* on all the lower-level
elements of the page that need to change.

## Raw JS versus jQuery

Your book uses

<pre>
<em>node</em>.classList.add(<em>classname</em>)
</pre>

to add a class to the list of classes on an element. (Think of this as converting

```
:::HTML
<div class="sidebar"> ... </div>
```

to

```
:::HTML
<div class="sidebar hidden"> ... </div>
```

You can achieve the same effect in jQuery with the

<pre>
$(<em>selector</em>).addClass(<em>classname</em>);
</pre>

## Keyboard Events

There are three keyboard events that you might potentially be interested in:

1. `keydown`
1. `keyup`
1. `keypress`

The last is only for real characters, not modifiers like shift or control.
The `keypress` event is officially
[deprecated](https://www.w3.org/TR/DOM-Level-3-Events/#event-type-keypress)
in favor of device-independent events, but it's likely to be supported for
a long time.

Your book uses `keyup`, so we will too.

The event listener is invoked with an event object, and that will contain
a `keyCode` property that is the Unicode codepoint of the key that was
entered.  We'll stick to [ASCII](http://www.asciitable.com/), and the
Escape key has a value of 27 (decimal).  So, we can do something like:

```
:::JavaScript
document.addEventListener('keyup',function (eventObj) {
    var ESC = 27;
    if( eventObj.keyCode === ESC ) {
        eventObj.preventDefault();
        ...
    }
});
```

## Pseudo Classes

You can add a pseudo-class to a CSS rule that will apply when the element
is in a particular *state*. For example, a hyperlink that has been visited
can be shown differently than an unvisited hyperlink, even though they are
both hyperlinks.  The default blue/purple for unvisited versus visited
hyperlinks could be done as shown below. We can even make them green when
they're hovered over and red at the moment they are clicked:

```
:::CSS
a:link    { color: blue; }
a:visited { color: purple; }
a:hover   { color: green; }
a:active  { color: red; }
```

Try it on the following link:

<div>
<style scoped>
a:link    { color: blue; }
a:visited { color: purple; }
a:hover   { color: green; }
a:active  { color: red; }
</style>
<p><a href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rumplestiltskin">I am a hyperlink to somewhere you have probably never been before</a></p>
<script>
/* the following doesn't work at all. Seems that the browser needs more
help caching URLs */

(function () {
    var d = new Date();
    var s = d.toLocaleDateString();
    $("#rnd").attr('href','http://www.google.com/?'+s);
})();
</script>
</div>

We will use the `:hover` pseudo-class in this chapter to trigger a transition

## CSS Transitions

Instead of instantaneously changing the appearance of a page when applying
new CSS rules, the browser can gradually change the layout to produce
*animations*. The [MDN article on
transitions](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US-docs/Web/CSS/CSS_Transitions/Using_CSS_transitions)
is, I think, a little clearer than our book.  Here's an example. Hover
over the middle box to see the effect.

<div>
<style scoped>
.box {
    display: inline-block;
    font-family: arial;
    width: 30%;
    vertical-align: top;
    
}
#before, #during {
    border: 1px solid green;
    font-size: 10px;
    height: 50px;
    background-color: #4080ff;
    }          
#during {

    /* transition these properties over 2 seconds each */
    transition: border 2s, height 2s, font-size 2s, background-color 2s;
}
#after, #during:hover {
    border: 4px solid red;
    height: 150px;
    font-size: 30px;
    background-color: #80ffff;
}
</style>
<div id="before" class="box">the quality of mercy is not strained</div>
<div id="during" class="box">it droppeth as the gentle rain from heaven</div>
<div id="after"  class="box">upon the place beneath</div>
</div>

Here are the CSS rules that accomplish that example. Note that the middle
box is defined with the *same* rules as the before box, and the `:hover`
pseudo-class is the same as the after box. The sole unique rule is the
`transition` property, which specifies which properties change and how
long. Here, I made them all 2 seconds long.

```
:::CSS
.box {
    display: inline-block;
    font-family: arial;
    width: 30%;
    vertical-align: top;
    
}
#before, #during {
    border: 1px solid green;
    font-size: 10px;
    height: 50px;
    background-color: #4080ff;
    }          
#during {
    /* transition these properties over 2 seconds each */
    transition: border 2s, height 2s, font-size 2s, background-color 2s;
}
#after, #during:hover {
    border: 4px solid red;
    height: 150px;
    font-size: 30px;
    background-color: #80ffff;
}
```

## Easing

The transitions are, by default, just done in a linear way. For example,
if the height has to change by 100px in 1 second, then it might change in
10 discrete steps of 10px every 100 milliseconds.  (The length of time
between steps is determined by the refresh rate of the browser.) However,
the linear transitions can be changed using *easing* which changes the
timing function. There is a list of [timing
functions](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/transition-timing-function)
on MDN.

## Custom Timing Functions

You can even create your own timing functions, say using
[cubic-bezier.com](http://cubic-bezier.com)

## jQuery Animations

The effects that our book describes are for the newest browsers (see some
of the warnings an MDN). jQuery provides another way to do animations in
an easy way that is compatible with older browsers, since the animations
are done by jQuery.  You can read the details here: [jQuery animate()
method](http://api.jquery.com/animate/). jQuery's `animate()` method even
includes options for different easing functions.

It's very easy to use. Try clicking on the following box:

<div>
<style scoped>
.box {
    border: 1px solid blue;
    background-color: #ccccff;
    width: 30%;
}
</style>
<div id="box1" class="box">Now is the winter of our discontent...</div>
<script>
$("#box1")
    .css({height: "50px", "font-size": "10px"})
    .click(function () {
        $("#box1").animate({height: "200px", "font-size": "20px"});
        });
</script>
</div>

Here's the JQ code. You'll see that the `.animate()` method's first
argument is a JS object literal that contains a collection of target CSS
values, just like the `.css()` method. The second argument says how many
milliseconds it should take to achieve that change.

```
:::JavaScript
$("#box1")
    .css({height: "50px", "font-size": "10px"})
    .click(function () {
        $("#box1").animate({height: "200px", "font-size": "20px"},
                           2000);
        });
```

Note that I could have specified the initial CSS using CSS style rules
instead of JQ's `.css()` method, but I like using the same medium for
specifying both the starting and ending values.

