# From Data to DOM

This reading supplements the reading from Chapter 11, titled Data to
DOM. We know from our earlier work with jQuery that one way to manipulate
the DOM is to dynamically add elements. This chapter walks us through the
code to have our Coffee Order app add a checkbox item to the page (in a
list of <q>Pending Orders</q>) every time a coffee order form is
submitted.

The key concepts are dynamically constructing DOM elements and, later,
calling a method while being able to specify the value of `this`.

## Constructing DOM Elements

If we think of the document as a living tree, what we are doing is
grafting a new branch, complete with twigs and leaves, onto the tree.

Your book does a very good job of describing this, with good pictures, so
this section is just a short recap:

* We will build a complete branch first, before adding it to the tree
* We will build each node of the branch independently, adding them to the
branch using jQuery's `.append` method to make one node a child of
another.
* We can build a simple node like this: `$("<div></div>")`
* To build a node with attributes, supply a JS object literal with the
attribute names and values:

`$("<input></input>", {'type': 'checkbox', 'value': 'fred'})`

Your book's authors do this as part of an object constructor, with the
finished branch stored as an instance variable. Only later is the finished
branch grafted onto the document.

## Calling Methods

In the next part of the chapter, page 235, the authors modify the form
submission handler to invoke two methods on two objects. Here's the code:

```
:::JavaScript
formHandler.addSubmitHandler(function (data) {
    myTruck.createOrder.call(myTruck, data);
    checkList.addRow.call(checkList, data);
});
```

They introduce the JavaScript `call` method, which is a way to invoke a
function as a method and supply the value of `this` in doing so.

It's an interesting example of the use of `call`, but it's
unnecessary. You have an object and its argument, and you know what method
to run, so the code is equivalent to two ordinary method calls:

```
:::JavaScript
formHandler.addSubmitHandler(function (data) {
    myTruck.createOrder(data);
    checkList.addRow(data);
});
```

(In fact, their solution code uses the above code, rather than the code in
the book.)

We will have occasion to see `.call()` later in the course, when we learn
about object inheritance.

## Searching down the tree

We have used jQuery many times to search the DOM. For example:

`$("#fred")`

`$("[data-coffee-form=myform]")`

The expressions above search the entire document, but what if you already
have a jQuery wrapped set for part of the document (a subtree), and you
want to search that subtree?  In that case, you can use jQuery's `.find()`
method:

`$("#fred").find('[data-coffee-form=myform]')`

Or, if you already had something saved in a variable:

```
:::JavaScript
var $elt = $("#fred");
...
$elt.find("[data-coffee-form=myform]");
```

## Searching up the tree

Sometimes, you want to search *up* the tree, along your list of ancestors
(but not off the list: parent, grandparent, and great-grandparent, but not
uncles, great-aunts and the like). jQuery's `.closest()` method is good
for that. For example, the following finds the closest ancestor that is a
DIV:

`$elt.closest('div')`

## Delegation

Event delegation is a powerful jQuery technique that allows you to put
*one* event handler on an ancestor and delegate to it handling *all* the
events of a certain kind for all of its descendants.  For example, try
clicking on the items on this grocery list:

<ul id="groceries">
   <li>apple</li>
   <li>banana</li>
   <li>chocolate</li>
</ul>

<script>
$("#groceries").on('click','li', function (event) {
    var clickee = event.target;
    var text = $(clickee).text();
    alert("You clicked on the "+text);
});
</script>

Rather than put an event handler on each item (here only three, but you
should see how long my grocery lists get, especially when I'm hungry), we
can put one event handler on the UL element, and say

"anytime an LI is clicked, run this function"

We do that with the following code:

```
:::JavaScript
$("#groceries").on('click','li', function (event) {
    var clickee = event.target;
    var text = $(clickee).text();
    alert("You clicked on the "+text);
});
```

Note that the `event.target` is the actual element that was clicked on.

Why use event delegation? First, it's more efficient to have one event
handler than many. Second, if we are dynamically adding and removing
things from the list (as we are in the CoffeeRun app), the event handling
is much cleaner, if we don't have to worry about adding and removing event
handlers as well.

