# First Web Page

## Purpose

In this assignment, you'll show your command of these concepts and skills

* basic HTML
* basic CSS
* validation

The idea of the assignment is to build a page describing yourself (or a
fictional character). I used Hermione Granger.

There will be three sections with similar content types (a figure, with a
caption, some paragraphs, and some lists), but different background
colors, pictures and text.

## Pair Programming

Pair Programming is strongly encouraged for this assignment and every assignment. I will assign partners, randomly, each week. Choose one person to be the host and the other the guest and use the host's CS account (though you should share the coding/typing duties).

When the assignment is done, the guest should copy the result to their account, so they will have a copy.

## Previewing

You'll want to view your work while you develop it and before you turn it in. The URL will be:

```https://cs.wellesley.edu/~hostacct/cs204-assignments/a01/a01.html```

For security and honor code reasons, the browser will ask you for a username and password. The username and password for the host student will work. The browser will remember those credentials, so you won't have to give them a zillion times.

## To Do

You must do the following

* make a directory for this assignment in your `cs204-assignments` folder
`mkdir a01`
* Set up the basic page HTML in a file called `assign.html`. I suggest you use the
  [template](../../reading/template.html) in the reading.
* make a subdirectory for your images: `mkdir a01/images`
* write your HTML:
    * three sections
    * each with a figure with a caption
    * some paragraphs
    * a list
* style your content    
* validate the result

## Styling

* use margins and padding to keep text from jamming up against the borders
* figures have a two-pixel border in silver
* figure captions also have a border (1 pixel black)
* figure caption elements are 80% of their container, centered
* figure text is centered within its container
* figure captions have a background color that is 50% transparent of 80% gray.
* each section should have a different background color
* the main figures scale with the browser; the icons don't
* refer to the screencast:

<video controls style="width:50%;border:1px solid black">
    <source src="a01.mp4" type="video/mp4">
    Your browser doesn't support the video tag
</video>

## Time and Work

Last time, this assignment took 2 to 6 hours to do.

## Final Checklist

* Make sure your name is in the files. If you have a partner, *both* names should be in the files.
* Make sure everything works and looks nice
* Make sure both the HTML and the CSS are valid
* The guest should copy the result to their account by using the following
commands from the host's account:

```
cd ~/public_html/cs204-assignments
scp -r a01 guestacct@cs:public_html/cs204-assignments/
```

The first command, the `cd`, puts you in the folder containing the `a01`
folder. The second command recursively copies the `a01` folder to the
`cs204-assignments` in the guest's account. The `scp` command will prompt
for their password, which is why the guest needs to do it.

## How to turn this in

We'll grade the work in your `a01` folder; no need to do anything else

